blog: building a browser using Servo as a web engine (#171)
servo/servo.org: _posts/2024-08-27-building-browser.md

---
layout:     post
tags:       blog
title:      "Building a browser using Servo as a web engine!"
date:       2024-08-27

> summary:    It's time to build a web browser based on Servo!

Author: I updated it a bit, and feel free to update it to a better slogan!

categories:
---

> As a web engine, Servo primarily handles everything around scripting and layout. Despite having [servoshell](https://github.com/servo/servo/tree/main/ports/servoshell) as a minimum browser reference, it didn’t explore beyond basic functionalities and the test harness for the [web platform test](https://wpt.servo.org/). But fortunately, the Servo community did try to push it bit by bit. The servo shell itself got a [new browser UI](https://servo.org/blog/2023/09/15/upcoming-events-and-new-browser-ui/) from [Egui](https://www.egui.rs/) last year. The [Tauri](https://tauri.app/) community also attempted to [embed](https://servo.org/blog/2024/01/19/embedding-update/) Servo as a backend for proof of concept. This year, [@wusyong](https://github.com/wusyong) created the [Verso](https://github.com/versotile-org/verso) project as an experiment to explore full browser story for Servo. In this post, we will explain what we try to achieve, what we found, and what’s next for building a browser using Servo as a web engine.

Author: Yeah, I saw there are more UI elements added to servoshell recently. I changed the wording a bit.

I think we could discuss whether Servo wants to grow into a browser itself in the Zulip topic. Verso is indeed an experiment of my vision only. And I remembered there are people who want to implement `<web-view>` for UI usage instead.

The fundamental support of multi-view was reviewed and merged into Servo earlier this year thanks to [@delan](https://github.com/delan) ([#30840](https://github.com/servo/servo/pull/30840), [#30841](https://github.com/servo/servo/pull/30841), [#30842](https://github.com/servo/servo/pull/30842)). Verso polished it as a specific type called [WebView](https://docs.versotile.org/verso/webview/struct.WebView.html).  And then, any type who owns web views can decide how to present them depending on their IDs. In Verso’s window, two webviews are created at the moment—one for [handling regular web pages](https://docs.versotile.org/verso/window/struct.Window.html#method.handle_servo_messages_with_webview) and the other for [handling the UI](https://docs.versotile.org/verso/window/struct.Window.html#method.handle_servo_messages_with_panel), which is currently called the Panel. The result of the [showcase](https://github.com/versotile-org/verso?tab=readme-ov-file#verso) in Verso’s README.md looks like this:

<figure class="_fig"><a href="{{ '/img/blog/crt-demo.gif' | url }}"><img src="{{ '/img/blog/crt-demo.gif' | url }}"
    alt="Verso displaying ASCII texts with CRT style"></a>

> <figcaption>Figure 1: Verso window displaying two different webviews. One for UI, the other for webpage.</figcaption></figure>

Author: Even if it's a video, it's still going to take a few MB. However, I checked other assets, and there are many others larger than this. I suppose it's okay to keep it as a GIF.

> <figcaption>Figure 1: Verso window displaying two different webviews. One for UI, the other for webpage.</figcaption></figure>

Reviewer: can i get a copy of the original screen recording, pre-gif-dithering, or was this file the original? i think the verso window is important for this figure, and i think i can make it smaller :)

> <figcaption>Figure 1: Verso window displaying two different webviews. One for UI, the other for webpage.</figcaption></figure>

Reviewer: ping :)

> <figcaption>Figure 1: Verso window displaying two different webviews. One for UI, the other for webpage.</figcaption></figure>

Author: Ah sorry I missed the comment. Here's the original video.
https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ae63d0e2-f706-4cb4-8a33-10960148a24c

> <figcaption>Figure 1: Verso window displaying two different webviews. One for UI, the other for webpage.</figcaption></figure>

Reviewer: thanks! done in 2f863b4f2b7879c3a3536c04ef929631002767e2

## What’s next?

With multi-view and multi-window support as the fundamental building blocks, we could create more UI elements to keep pushing the browser and embedding research. At the same time, we want to reflect on our progress and sort out the priorities. Servo is a huge project, and many potential improvements are still awaiting. Here are some directions that are worth pushing.

#### Are we browser yet?

We are preparing a site, [arewebrowseryet.com](https://servo.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/263398-general/topic/arewebrowseryet.2Ecom), in the hope of gathering the strength of the community to help us display the statistics of supported CSS properties and Web APIs in Servo by [popularity order](https://chromestatus.com/metrics/css/popularity) and benchmark results like jetstream2, speedometer3, …etc. We hope this will eventually give newcomers a better overview of Servo.

#### Script triage

> There’s a [script triage meeting](https://github.com/servo/project/issues/99) bi-weekly to triage any issues around the script crate and more. Once we get the statistics of supported WebAPIs, we can find the most popular ones that haven’t been implemented or fixed yet. We are already fixing some issues around loading the order and re-implementing [ReadableStream](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream) in Rust. If you are interested in implementing WebAPIs in Servo, feel free to join the meeting and listen.

Author: Changed it to servo triage meeting.

---
layout:     post
tags:       blog
title:      "Building a browser using Servo as a web engine!"

> date:       2024-08-27

Reviewer 2: Remember to update the date when publishing the blog post.

Author: Added in [681694e](https://github.com/servo/servo.org/pull/171/commits/681694ec9d4a22a3c8fc0ac493c61aa4898485a8)

summary:    Let's build another web browser based on Servo!
categories:
---

As a web engine, Servo primarily handles everything around scripting and layout.
For embedding use cases, the [Tauri](https://tauri.app) community experimented with [adding a new Servo backend]({{ '/blog/2024/01/19/embedding-update/' | url }}), but Servo can also be used to build a browser.

We have a reference browser in the form of [servoshell](https://github.com/servo/servo/tree/main/ports/servoshell), which has historically been used as a minimal example and as a test harness for the [Web Platform Tests](https://wpt.servo.org).
Nevertheless, the Servo community has steadily worked towards making it a browser in its own right, starting with [our new browser UI]({{ '/blog/2023/09/15/upcoming-events-and-new-browser-ui/' | url }}) based on [egui](https://www.egui.rs) last year.

> This year, [@wusyong](https://github.com/wusyong) created the [Verso](https://github.com/versotile-org/verso) project as a way to explore the features Servo needs to power a robust web browser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This year, [@wusyong](https://github.com/wusyong), a member of [Servo TSC](https://servo.org/governance/), created the [Verso](https://github.com/versotile-org/verso) project as a way to explore the features Servo needs to power a robust web browser.
```

Author: Added in [f0e7fa9](https://github.com/servo/servo.org/pull/171/commits/f0e7fa9024bb157c7bfd66bda46bd04d9a84522e)

The result of the [showcase](https://github.com/versotile-org/verso?tab=readme-ov-file#verso) in Verso’s README.md looks like this:

<figure class="_fig"><a href="{{ '/img/blog/verso-crt-demo.webp' | url }}"><img src="{{ '/img/blog/verso-crt-demo.webp' | url }}"
    alt="Verso displaying ASCII text in a CRT style"></a>
<figcaption>Figure 1: Verso window displaying two different webviews. One for the UI, the other for the web page.</figcaption></figure>

For now, the inter-process communication is done via Servo’s existing channel messages like [EmbedderMsg](https://doc.servo.org/embedder_traits/enum.EmbedderMsg.html) and [EmbedderEvent](https://doc.servo.org/compositing/windowing/enum.EmbedderEvent.html).
We are looking to improve the IPC mechanism with more granular control over DOM elements.
So, the panel UI can be updated based on the status of web pages.
One example is when the page URL is changed and the navigation bar needs to be updated.
There are some candidates for this, such as [WebDriverCommandMsg](https://doc.servo.org/script_traits/enum.WebDriverCommandMsg.html).

> [@webbeef](https://github.com/webbeef) also started a discussion about [defining custom elements](https://github.com/servo/servo/discussions/32883) like `<web-view>` for better ergonomics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@webbeef](https://github.com/webbeef) also started a discussion about [defining custom elements](https://github.com/servo/servo/discussions/32883) like `<webview>` for better ergonomics.
```

This is a suggestion, but I've seen `<webview>` used in other projects: https://www.electronjs.org/docs/latest/api/webview-tag

Author: Added in [f0e7fa9](https://github.com/servo/servo.org/pull/171/commits/f0e7fa9024bb157c7bfd66bda46bd04d9a84522e)

For example, WebRender currently [only supports rendering a single “document”](https://github.com/servo/webrender/blob/0.64/webrender/src/renderer/mod.rs#L1228).
Unless we create multiple WebRender instances, like Firefox does, we have one WebRender document that has to constantly update all of its display lists to show on all of our windows.
This could potentially lead to race conditions where a webview may draw to the wrong window for a split second.

There are also different OpenGL versions across multiple platforms, which can be challenging to configure and link.
Verso is experimenting with using [Glutin](https://docs.rs/glutin/latest/glutin/) for better configuration and attempting to get closer to the general Rust ecosystem.

## What’s next?

With multi-view and multi-window support as the fundamental building blocks, we could create more UI elements to keep pushing the envelope of our browser and embedding research.
At the same time, Servo is a huge project, with many potential improvements still to come, so we want to reflect on our progress and decide on our priorities.
Here are some directions that are worth pursuing.

### Are we browser yet?

> We are building a page, [arewebrowseryet.com](https://servo.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/263398-general/topic/arewebrowseryet.2Ecom), in the hope of gathering the strength of the community to help us display the statistics of supported CSS properties and web APIs in Servo by [popularity order](https://chromestatus.com/metrics/css/popularity) and benchmark results such as jetstream2 and speedometer3.

Reviewer 2: It can be nice to mention this idea, but I'm afraid if we could be over promising here. Maybe we could wait until we have something more detailed to announce this. Also this is not strictly related to this blog post, so could go in a monthly update when the website is ready.

Also the link to Zulip is not public if you don't have a Zulip account, so it's not usually nice to find links that go to a page where you need to register.

Author: I update the paragraph a bit in Added in [f0e7fa9](https://github.com/servo/servo.org/pull/171/commits/f0e7fa9024bb157c7bfd66bda46bd04d9a84522e).
It focuses more on benchmarking and statistic metrics now. I also added what sagudev has done so far.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, this looks better to me.

But since our implementations of WebGL, WebGPU, and WebXR are all tied to a single WebRender instance, which in turn only supports a single OpenGL context for now, we chose to use a single context with multiple surfaces.
This alternative approach could potentially use less memory and spawn fewer threads.
For more details, see [this series of blog posts](https://wusyong.github.io/posts/verso-compositor-part3/) by [@wusyong](https://github.com/wusyong).

<figure class="_fig"><a href="{{ '/img/blog/multiwindow.png' | url }}"><img src="{{ '/img/blog/multiwindow.png' | url }}"
    alt="Verso displaying two windows"></a>
<figcaption>Figure 2: Verso creates two different windows with same OpenGL context.</figcaption></figure>

There is still room for improvement.
For example, WebRender currently [only supports rendering a single “document”](https://github.com/servo/webrender/blob/0.64/webrender/src/renderer/mod.rs#L1228).
This means this document has to constantly update different display lists to show on other windows, which may cause race conditions and let unintended webview display on the wrong window in a slip second.

> <!-- why is this not a problem in Firefox? -->

Author: Firefox create [another webrender](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/source/gfx/webrender_bindings/src/bindings.rs#1781) whenever a new window is created.
There's a [TODO](https://github.com/servo/webrender/blob/main/webrender/src/renderer/mod.rs#L1016) in webrender to support multiple documents rendering. I would like to explore this way to see if we can just use single webrender to support multiple window.

Reviewer: reworked to include this in 6c730ac5c5e1284713b9de6aa51377211d15f5e0

We hope this will eventually give newcomers a better overview of Servo.

### Script triage

There’s a [Servo triage meeting](https://github.com/servo/project/issues/100) every two weeks to triage any issues around the script crate and more.
Once we get the statistics of supported web APIs, we can find the most popular ones that haven’t been implemented or fixed yet.
We are already fixing some issues around loading the order and re-implementing [ReadableStream](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream) in Rust.
If you are interested in implementing web APIs in Servo, feel free to join the next meeting.

### Multi-process and sandboxing

Some features are crucial to the browser but not visible to users.
Multi-process architecture and sandboxing belong to this category.
Both of these are implemented in Servo to some extent, but are not enabled by default <!-- is this true for both? i know it’s true for multiprocess, but what about sandboxing? -->.

> They also only support Linux and macOS for now <!-- is this true for both? i know it’s true for sandboxing, but what about multiprocess? -->.

Author: ipc-channel supports Windows, but there's [a bug that will crash on Windows](https://github.com/servo/ipc-channel/issues/310) if we try to enable multiprocess mode.
I belive both mods only support Linux and macOS for now in [constellation/sandboxing.rs](https://github.com/servo/servo/blob/ebed9218f2907767ba3c9dd9f27f30a6a6e9f225/components/constellation/sandboxing.rs).
And the [default Opts](https://doc.servo.org/src/servo_config/opts.rs.html#396) disable them by default.
